Iterates on the PSE role definition (#79)
OctopusDeploy/People: Software-Engineering/L5-Principal-Software-Engineer.md

# L5: Principal Software Engineer

> _I am an influential Engineering leader who identifies problems and opportunities relevant to Octopus product and technical strategies, builds consensus to invest in solutions, and guides Engineering to deliver significant lasting change across Octopus._

- **Thinking horizon**: 1 year
- **Impact radius**: Group
- **Evaluation**: Director
- **Responsibility and direction needed**: I drive technical strategy in alignment with product strategy for my group. Point me in the right direction with helpful constraints and good outcomes happen with minimal oversight.

## 🦉 Domain expertise

> - I maintain a clear and understandable vision for the technical direction for teams within my group.

Reviewer: I'd like to understand this point further. Do we mean an explicit vision for the technical direction each team should be following? We talk about target achitecture below, but I suspect we are more talking about helping teams set and follow technical direction within their missions.

Author: For context: This isn't new. I moved this existing point from another section. But I'm glad you're asking for clarity.

Yes, I see two distinct (but sometimes connected) traits:

- contribution to + championship of the target architecture
- being accountable for the technical direction their specific team(s) are taking to deliver specific outcomes

In some cases, these may intersect or link, but in others, they won't.

For Directors, I often say:

- Your first responsibility is to your group - are they winning?
- If your group is winning, work on something broader-scoped

The same guidance applies to PSEs. What do you think?

- I have a deep understanding of the technical strategy and target architecture aligned with my group.
- I help teams in my group make critical product architecture and implementation decisions that result in better outcomes.

> - I have a broad understanding of the Octopus technical strategy and target architecture.

Reviewer: Nit: I'd like the "I have broad understaing..." to be just above "I have deep understanding...", similar to the customer success section, as the information flows well that way.

# L5: Principal Software Engineer

> _I am an influential Engineering leader who identifies problems and opportunities relevant to Octopus product and technical strategies, builds consensus to invest in solutions, and guides Engineering to deliver significant lasting change across Octopus._

- **Thinking horizon**: 1 year
- **Impact radius**: Group
- **Evaluation**: Director
- **Responsibility and direction needed**: I drive technical strategy in alignment with product strategy for my group. I develop that technical strategy and deliver good outcomes through it, with minimal oversight.
- **Glossary (examples from 2023/24)**: ["Octopus Technical Strategy"](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1onaZ7qRWc7BSLWyGw8duIIlOCd2k812zMIXXtlBfXL8/edit#heading=h.a65d8nqv4wgr) | ["Target Architecture"](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/OctopusDeploy/tree/main/docs/target-architecture)

## 🦉 Domain expertise

- Within my group:
    - I maintain a clear and understandable technical direction for teams within my group to help them achieve their missions with high-quality at speed.

>     - I have a deep understanding of the technical direction for all teams within my group so I can detect and correct issues early.

Author: I've got an idea to clarify this. Thanks.

    - I help teams in my group make critical product architecture and implementation decisions that result in better outcomes.
    - I manage technical risks effectively, and architect to reduce technical risk.
- Across Octopus:
    - I have a broad understanding of the Octopus technical strategy and target architecture.

>     - I am an effective custodian for part of the Octopus target architecture.

Reviewer 2: This seems oddly specific to me. Target architecture is important, but from my perspective it is also just another piece of important work that needs to be balanced with other PSE level work. Being able to make these tradeoffs effectively to get the right things done at the right time is the main thing I look for in a PSE rather than singling out a particular type of work. 

I think it sets a specific expectation with 5.1 PSEs that they will need to complete a target architecture project within a certain timeframe in order to be promoted to 5.2.

I think if a 5.1 PSE got to a point where they had effectively prioritised all of their work, including target architecture, and made the right tradeoff decisions to get the right things done then I would still want to promote them to 5.2. Even if at that point in time the target architecture project was unfinished or deprioritised as long as it was the right call to make.

Reviewer: My interpretation of this point is that they own part of the target architecture - the thinking, analysis, and distillation into the documentation, but it does not cross over into expectations around the timely execution / delivery of it. 

PSE's should all own part of our target architecture, (I think) this is an explicit responsibility of the role - that they help us deliberately think and plan for architectural changes needed to support our business ambitions.

What if we extended it to something like:

```suggestion
    - I am an effective custodian for part of the Octopus target architecture. I contribute to the proactive architectural thinking and planning that ensures that Octopus' core technologies continue to be fit-for-purpose for the Octopus business.
```

To try and ensure that we emphasize the planning / thinking part of the contribution, but don't put expectations around execution / delivery?

- I contributed to building blocks or core technologies used by a variety of teams.

</details>

## 🌱 Teaching and Mentoring

- I am an expert mentor and teacher.
- I am curious, listen, and encourage healthy conflict.
- I allow myself to be persuaded by great ideas.
- I create clarity by communicating complex things in simple and accessible ways.
- I understand my broadest impact comes from empowering those around me.
- I am an expert at designing and reviewing software architecture and code.
- I help teams and individuals understand our technical strategy, how it connects to our product strategy, and the things we are doing to progress it.
- I regularly provide training and support for new methods, tools, and patterns.
- I actively share knowledge relevant to multiple teams.
- I collaborate with managers and lead software engineers to identify and find ways to fill any gaps in technical skills required in my teams.

<details>
<summary>Examples</summary>

- I was consistently in demand for design and code review.
- I became aware that I was a bottleneck and worked proactively with managers to uplift and empower other people to make the team more effective.

> - I am actively mentoring multiple Octopus engineers, including a Lead Software Engineer aspiring to become a Principal Software Engineer.

Reviewer 3: My experience in heading toward L5 was that there's not that much space in the org for new PSEs. Is the intent of explicitly mentioning an L4 with L5 aspirations intended to be representative of the level of mentoring we should be capable of? Or is it more literal and direct?

My concern here is that if we expect every L5 to be mentoring and stoking the ambitions of (at least) one L4, but we don't have any "space" to actually be promoting any of them into the role, it could be a recipe for sadness and frustration.

Author: Sorry I took so long to respond! You've got a valid point. I still think it's worth taking the risk to mentor an L4 because:
- It's a healthy challenge for the mentor and mentee.
- You and your manager can help set realistic expectations.
- It can take years to build the capabilities, why not start now?
- We won't be here forever, and I want Octopus to be resilient.
- We may need someone for Dragonfruit later this year?
- If I mentored an L4 and they left Octopus to be an L5 somewhere else because we didn't have a ready opportunity, I'd still celebrate being part of that story.
- We will continue growing (eventually) at 30% on average, so more opportunities will open up over a 3 year period.

Reviewer 4: > If I mentored an L4 and they left Octopus to be an L5 somewhere else because we didn't have a ready opportunity, I'd still celebrate being part of that story.

💯 

Also, if we’re not actively mentoring L4s with L5 aspirations, they’ll look to move elsewhere to get that support. So even if there’s no immediate L5 opportunity here, mentoring them now means they’re more likely to stick around as highly impactful L4s for longer before they eventually move on.

I totally agree there's nuance and risk of misunderstanding here though, which will need to be covered by setting clear expectations about limited L5 role openings.

- Engineers at Octopus seek out to work on my teams to learn from me.
- After reviewing a code contribution from an engineer I saw could be improved, I worked directly with that engineer and their manager or team leader to uplift their skills in the identified growth area.
- I helped a team make a course correction based on new information or ideas.
- I provided appropriate technical freedom, and framing, that allowed the Lead Software Engineers on my teams to thrive independently.

> - I have elevated my focus significantly because the teams I support have been uplifted and empowered to the point they can deliver their mission with me as a sounding board.

Reviewer 2: Oh that's an interesting addition. I think it's good but I'd be interested to know how different people interpret this.

Reviewer 5: To add to @hogfish's comment, do we have an example of this that can help explain this point?

Author: I believe this already existed, but I moved it into this area of teaching and mentoring.

Thinking of examples, I believe this is a relatively common pattern.

Instead of what's written, which is more generic, what do you thin of this example? @andrewabest does this also help with the example you were reaching for in another comment?

> When launching a new mission, I helped a team navigate ambiguity, get some wins on the board, set helpful constraints, and uplifted + empowered people in the team so they became more self-sufficient.

Reviewer 5: I like that example @michaelnoonan. It helps explain the expectations.

Reviewer: I like this example, it is what we seek to do in the role.

Author: I've replaced the example using what I suggested in this dicussion thread.

- I generate energy in the teams I work with, motivating them to achieve great outcomes.
- I facilitate effective and timely decision making, especially when the decision affects multiple teams.
- I build solutions that improve the productivity and/or quality of work of many people/teams.
- I recognise patterns of organisational dysfunction, by observing data points, amplifying these signals, and advocating effectively for improvement.
- I am a contributor to or member of the leadership teams in my group.
- I set a positive example throughout the company for quality, accountability, and responsibility.
- I help define hiring standards and practices.

<details>
<summary>Examples</summary>

- During an incident postmortem, I recognised a valuable lesson and found a way to disseminate the lesson throughout R&D.
- I drove an entire multiteam program from inception through to shipping code, without regular oversight.
- I collaborated with other senior leaders to ensure I was aware of all major initiatives at Octopus and could account for them in my own initiatives.

> - The teams I work with are consistently winning. They chose ambitious targets, managed scope and expectations effectively, and delivered customer value frequently with customer adoption trends going in the right direction.

Reviewer 6: nit:

```
- The teams I work with are consistently winning. They chose ambitious targets, managed scope and expectations effectively, and delivered customer value frequently with customer adoption trends going in the right direction.
```

"consistently winning" could imply there isn't room for making a mistake or learning from a failure.

Suggest a change to:
```
- The teams I work with chose ambitious targets, managed scope and expectations effectively, and delivered customer value frequently with customer adoption trends going in the right direction.
```

Or if this relates to:
```
- I generate energy in the teams I work with, motivating them to achieve great outcomes.
```

Maybe we want:
```
- The teams I work with feel like they are winning. They chose ambitious targets, managed scope and expectations effectively, and delivered customer value frequently with customer adoption trends going in the right direction.
```

Author: >"consistently winning" could imply there isn't room for making a mistake or learning from a failure.

Good pick up. Thanks.

I do want to retain an aspect of teams having that winning feeling. I've adopted your last suggestion.

# L5: Principal Software Engineer

> _I am an influential Engineering leader who identifies problems and opportunities relevant to Octopus product and technical strategies, builds consensus to invest in solutions, and guides Engineering to deliver significant lasting change across Octopus._

- **Thinking horizon**: 1 year
- **Impact radius**: Group
- **Evaluation**: Director

> - **Responsibility and direction needed**: I drive technical strategy in alignment with product strategy for my group. Point me in the right direction with helpful constraints and good outcomes happen with minimal oversight.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Responsibility and direction needed**: I drive technical strategy in alignment with product strategy for my group.
```

The second sentence is unlikely to add information as equivalent sentiment also appears in the L4 definition (as `Consistently takes brand new ideas from inception to production with limited supervision`).

> - **Links**: [2023/24 Octopus Technical Strategy](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1onaZ7qRWc7BSLWyGw8duIIlOCd2k812zMIXXtlBfXL8/edit#heading=h.a65d8nqv4wgr) | [Target Architecture](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/OctopusDeploy/tree/main/docs/target-architecture)

Reviewer 4: On first read, it's unclear why these links are here. The other bullet points refer to technical strategy "for my group", but these links refer to R&D-wide technical strategy. This might muddy the waters, unless we clarify explicitly.

Author: Why I added something: We refer to "Octopus technical strategy" and "Octopus target architecture" throughout this role description, but don't define those terms. This was an attempt to call these out as important terms that aid understanding of the role.

Instead of "links", what about "definitions" or "important terms"? Suggestions welcome!

Reviewer 4: Ah, right, thank you. 

I was confused initially because PEs own _group-level_ technical strategy, so it felt surprising to see _R&D-level_ technical strategy called out right alongside the impact radius here.

In that case, suggestion:

```suggestion
- **Glossary (examples from 2023/24)**: ["Octopus Technical Strategy"](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1onaZ7qRWc7BSLWyGw8duIIlOCd2k812zMIXXtlBfXL8/edit#heading=h.a65d8nqv4wgr) | ["Target Architecture"](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/OctopusDeploy/tree/main/docs/target-architecture)
```

- I helped a team reduce complexity and risk through sound architectural thinking resulting in better outcomes.
- I developed a plan to evolve the architecture of a particularly difficult/risky/ambigious part of the core components of Octopus iterating in the open with other people using techniques like RFCs and presentations/breakouts at R&D Weekly and RADAR sessions.
- I worked with teams to manage multiple conflicting priorities, navigated difficult tradeoffs, and helped sequence work resulting in the best collective outcome.
- I collaborated with another principal engineer to ensure that a feature I was helping a team with would support a feature I knew another team was planning.
- I developed a section of the Octopus target architecture, which required a thorough understanding of the problem space, proposing potential solutions, and offering a strong and informed opinion on the best solution.

> - I contributed to building blocks or core technologies used by a variety of teams.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

This feels more like an indicator that the engineer "is in Foundations Group", as opposed to "is at Principal Engineer" level.

Reviewer: I disagree that this is only the domain of foundations group. A good example would be the building blocks Jim has developed for the new executions pipeline. Or the observability plumbing Rob W has been working on. Principals tend to contribute to core technology used across teams. 

That being said, contributing to building blocks / core technologies doesn't feel like an L5-specific concern, so if that was the basis of the reasoning I'd be happy to see it go.

An alternative would be 

`I designed and implemented core technologies used by a variety of teams`, with an emphasis on not being a contributor, but really the creator of these things.

Reviewer 4: > contributing to building blocks / core technologies doesn't feel like an L5-specific concern

Yes, that's the basis of my reasoning 👍

Author: I've made an edit using your suggestion @andrewabest.

</details>

## 🌱 Teaching and Mentoring

- I am an expert mentor and teacher.

> - I am curious, listen, and encourage healthy debate.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- I am curious, listen, and encourage healthy conflict.
```
Glad to see "healthy" added. For consistently and clarity, I suggest using the term "healthy conflict", which is the term we now use in the [Leadership definition](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/People/blob/main/Leadership.md#i-am-an-exemplary-communicator) (see also the [management Slack thread](https://octopusdeploy.slack.com/archives/G017HFUA2KD/p1718933820453139) that led to the choice of this term).

- I regularly provide training and support for new methods, tools, and patterns.
- I actively share knowledge relevant to multiple teams.
- I collaborate with managers and lead software engineers to identify and find ways to fill any gaps in technical skills required in my teams.

<details>
<summary>Examples</summary>

- I was consistently in demand for design and code review.
- I became aware that I was a bottleneck and worked proactively with managers to uplift and empower other people to make the team more effective.
- I am actively mentoring multiple Octopus engineers, including a Lead Software Engineer aspiring to become a Principal Software Engineer.
- Engineers at Octopus seek out to work on my teams to learn from me.
- After reviewing a code contribution from an engineer I saw could be improved, I worked directly with that engineer and their manager or team leader to uplift their skills in the identified growth area.
- I helped a team make a course correction based on new information or ideas.
- I provided appropriate technical freedom, and framing, that allowed the Lead Software Engineers on my teams to thrive independently.

> - I have elevated/shifted my focus significantly because the team(s) I support have been uplifted and empowered to the point they can deliver their mission with me as a sounding board.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- I have elevated my focus significantly because the teams I support have been uplifted and empowered to the point they can deliver their mission with me as a sounding board.
```

</details>

> ## 🧭 Culture and Leadership

Reviewer: I feel like there is an item missing that emphasizes the responsibility for digging into ill-defined problems and signals that we tend to spot at this level, and doing what is necessary to ensure they are well-understood and accounted for / solved. It is never "someone elses problem", and we can't sweep things under the rug. Even if the problem is gnarly / hard / unglamorous, we dig into it until we understand how to derisk it, or to solve it.

It would be nice to capture this in a dot point as a part of technical leadership at this level.

Reviewer: I can't figure out how to articulate this well, so may leave it for a "future improvement" if I can think of a better way to express it.

Author: Leaving it for the future so we can circulate this iteration.

> - I am a proponent of [operational excellence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operational_excellence) and [learning from incidents](https://www.learningfromincidents.io/about).

Reviewer 4: 💭 Clarifying: Do we mean [operational excellence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operational_excellence) in the broad sense of being excellent at operations... or in some more specific sense (e.g. [of the Juran model, Shingo model, FLEX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operational_excellence), etc)? 
- If meant in the broad sense, suggest replacing the jargon with what we actually mean and want to highlight here
- If meant in the specific sense... I better go read that book! 😅

Author: My intent is they are proponents of the principles that fall under the term "operational excellence". I used the Wikipedia entry as a strawman... but now realise it's very broad.

I was originally inspired by Amazon's well-architected framework, where one pillar is called "Operational Excellence": https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/operational-excellence-pillar/operational-excellence.html

Perhaps we could point at that? Or adapt theirs to write our own? 🤔

Reviewer 4: It may help to break up this problem into 2 steps:

1. For this PR, simply say what we mean. That is, what is it about Amazon's "Operational Excellence" that we want to capture here, that isn't already captured elsewhere (in this role description, or in other resources like our Technical Architecture)?

2. More broadly, we could then have an initiative to evaluate and adopt some framework as a new sensible default. Then we'd raise a separate PR to point to that.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Roy that I'd rather just say what we mean here, and resist linking to external documentation which we don't have control over. 

The Amazon link you mentioned Mike says "At Amazon, we define operational excellence as a commitment to build software correctly while consistently delivering a great customer experience" - can we use that instead? And break the incidents learning part into a separate dot point without the link?

Reviewer 5: +1 to break out the incident learning part into a separate dot point.

Saying what we mean here without an external link would help us continue to refine this role definition with the boundary of Octopus.

Author: I'm going to delete this for now so we can circulate this iteration.

Author: Actually, I think I found a way to express it. Let me know what you think

Reviewer 6: Just opening this back up because I'm a bit confused by this one as well. 

I think putting this in would probably trigger go away and do a little bit of learning to make sure I understand this well and even then on the face of it feels like I'd be championing a specific change or uplift rather than it just being part of the role.

But the example doesn't make me think this:
```
- During an incident postmortem, I recognised a valuable lesson and found a way to disseminate the lesson throughout R&D.
```

If I were to try to reverse engineer something from that example I might end up with:
```
- I create an environment of safety and learning with respect to incident management
```

Does that miss anything?

Author: Thanks all so far. What I think I'm trying to express is the importance of our most influential software engineers championing "safety and learning" across the spectrum "from discovery to delivery and incidents".

I have removed the added line (originally operation excellence and learning from incidents) and added a statement explaining that "safety and learning" is expected across the entire spectrum/lifecycle.

If the extra qualification isn't resonating ("I still don't get it"), or is redundant ("The spectrum is already clear enough without further qualification"), I'm happy to remove it.

> - I get things right a lot of the time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```
I agree with what you're trying to get at here, but this feels like it risks misinterpretation, especially in 🧭 Culture and Leadership. I think being "right" is covered by 🦉 Domain expertise, and you've already added the qualification "[I am] wrong _sometimes_". I think that's clear enough.

- I create an environment where others feel safe to take risks and make mistakes, by modeling vulnerability, thinking in the open, being wrong sometimes, and accepting corrections.
- I generate energy in the teams I work with, motivating them to achieve great outcomes.
- I facilitate effective and timely decision making, especially when the decision affects multiple teams.
- I build solutions that improve the productivity and/or quality of work of many people/teams.
- I recognise patterns of organisational dysfunction, by observing data points, amplifying these signals, and advocating effectively for improvement.

> - I am an advisor or contributor to the leadership teams in my group.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- I am a contributor to or member of the leadership teams in my group.
```

Given the FAQ around *LT _membership_, suggest reducing ambiguity by being explicit here.

- I set a positive example throughout the company for quality, accountability, and responsibility.
- I help define hiring standards and practices.

<details>
<summary>Examples</summary>

> - During a post-incident review, I recognised a valuable lesson and found a way to disseminate the lesson throughout R&D.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- During an incident postmortem, I recognised a valuable lesson and found a way to disseminate the lesson throughout R&D.
```

[nitpick] Hoping we can settle on [consistent language](https://octopushq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/RND/pages/2414674935/How+to+run+a+valuable+Blameless+Postmortem).

- I drove an entire multiteam program from inception through to shipping code, without regular oversight.
- I collaborated with other senior leaders to ensure I was aware of all major initiatives at Octopus and could account for them in my own initiatives.
- The teams I work with are consistently winning. They chose ambitious targets, managed scope and expectations effectively, and delivered customer value frequently with customer adoption trends going in the right direction.

> - I identified a problem that was timely, important, and impactful, and worked closely with product, engineering, and executive stakeholders to articulate and refine a solution and delivery plan.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Suggest deleting this example. 

Reasoning: I know you've just moved this in this PR, but this section is now bigger. I don't think this example is concrete enough to be helpful; I find that I'm seeking an "example of the example".

- I identified a significant problem that was increasing cognitive load for engineers resulting in multiple defects, then created a lasting best-fit solution that aligned with our strategy and solved the problem.
- I identified a pattern of organisational dysfunction that was causing poor outcomes, shared my observations with my leadership team, and escalated the signal effectively, resulting in the dysfunction being corrected and collectively getting better outcomes.
- I regularly shared timely information in the right forums, like Slack and R&D Weekly, to amplify the work being done by my team(s), to detect misalignment or surprises, and to build confidence in our collective delivery plans.
- Instead of simply patching or extending an existing solution that was not fit for purpose anymore, my contribution opened up a whole new area of strategic possibility.
- I regularly participated in our code review and interview processes and provided feedback on how they could be improved.

</details>

## 🏆 Customer Success

- I have a broad understanding of Octopus product offerings and product strategy.

> - I have a deep understanding my group's product offerings and product strategy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- I have a deep understanding of my group's product offerings and product strategy.
```

- I understand what technical challenges are most impacting our customers at present, and how my own plans and the Octopus technical strategy seek to solve them.
- I am able to anticipate and adapt systems and practices to changes in load, usage, and customer requirements.

> - I work closely with my product managers and designers to ensure the best outcomes for our customers and continued product/market fit.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- I work with my teams (including product managers and designers) to ensure the best outcomes for our customers and continued product/market fit.
```

1. Avoid sounding unintentionally possessive of ("my") other people
2. Be inclusive of other roles (like Researchers)

- I find the balance between doing it right and getting it done.
- I am an expert at managing scope, finding ways to help my teams consistently deliver the high value to customers at speed.

> - I hold myself and my teams to a high standard of quality, with a specific focus on reliability, usability, and functionality.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- I hold myself and my teams to a high standard of quality, thinking holistically about reliability, usability, and functionality.
```

"Reliability, usability, and functionality" seems holistic, not "specific".

- I am responsive to changes in product priorities, keeping multiple teams focused on important, high-value efforts.
- I inform product strategy by helping senior leadership understand the organisation's engineering capabilities and technical strategy.

> - I help people from other departments, primarily support, customer success, revenue, and marketing, when my expertise will deliver better outcomes for our customers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- I collaborate with people from other departments, primarily support, customer success, revenue, and marketing, when my expertise will deliver better outcomes for our customers.
```

Suggest framing the interaction as neutral/symmetric, not dependent (i.e. "they" can help "us", too! :relaxed:).

<details>
<summary>Examples</summary>

- I helped a team pivot effectively in response to a direction change.

> - I helped a team find a faster path to market/customer value/adoption, helping them make acceptable tradeoffs in scope, time, and quality.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- I helped a team find a faster path to customer impact, through making acceptable tradeoffs in scope, time, and quality.
```

Readability

- I identified a risk where multiple teams would make life harder for each other, got them aligned, and accelerated their deliveries.

> - I contributed to the Octopus blog, a webinar, or a conference, explaining a lesson we learned as a way to reinforce the learning and to attract customers and potential future employees.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- I contributed publicly to the Octopus blog, a webinar, or a conference, explaining a lesson we learned as a way to reinforce the learning and to attract customers and potential future employees.
```

Emphasis.

- I participated actively and willingly in discovery activities, like customer research calls, and generated insights that improved overall customer outcomes.
- I noticed one of my teams getting bogged down in delivery. I helped them tease apart their scope and sequence their work to get themselves unblocked and get back to delivering value more quickly.
- I regularly tried the software delivered by my teams (I "tasted the food") and provided feedback where the reliability, usability, or functionality didn't meet our standard.
- I identified a risk in our product strategy or delivery that required a difficult tradeoff and influenced a change to mitigate that risk.
- I built an influential case to change direction/priority with a focus on promoting customer success.

> - I helped transform a customer at risk of churn into a case study. I did this by joining several calls with the customer, understanding the big picture, diagnosing the critical problems, making the customer feel heard, and ultimately delivering on our commitments.
> - I helped close-win a complex deal where my contributions provided the buyer with confidence in the functionality and quality of the services we offer today, and/or confidence in the product direction aligned to my group/teams. I also identified some areas we can improve in our current service offerings that will simplify similar deals in the future.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- I helped transform a customer at risk of churn into a case study. I did this by joining several calls with the customer, understanding the big picture, diagnosing the critical problems, making the customer feel heard, and ultimately delivering on our commitments.
- I helped close-win a complex deal where my contributions provided the buyer with confidence in the functionality and quality of the services we offer today, and/or confidence in the product direction aligned to my group/teams. I also identified some areas we can improve in our current service offerings that will simplify similar deals in the future.
```

💭 Clarifying: I agree these are great outcomes... but they feel more like outcomes of a team (or a leadership team) working together. Is there a way we can be more concrete and specific about the PE contribution here (in contrast to other roles)? Examples:

- I joined several calls with a customer who was at risk of churn. I used my listening skills and my insight into the technical capabilities of our product to add clarity to the discussion. This enabled us to transform this customer into a case study.

- I was pulled into a complex deal negotiation. I used my insight into the functionality and quality of the services we offer today, and my group's product direction, to provide the buyer with confidence. This enabled the deal to get to Closed-Won.

- I allow myself to be persuaded by great ideas.

<details>
<summary>Examples</summary>

- I was consistently in demand for design and code review.
- I became aware that I was a bottleneck and worked proactively with managers to uplift and empower other people to make the team more effective.
- I am actively mentoring multiple Octopus engineers, including a Lead Software Engineer aspiring to become a Principal Software Engineer.
- Engineers at Octopus seek out to work on my teams to learn from me.
- After reviewing a code contribution from an engineer I saw could be improved, I worked directly with that engineer and their manager or team leader to uplift their skills in the identified growth area.
- I helped a team make a course correction based on new information or ideas.
- I provided appropriate technical freedom, and framing, that allowed the Lead Software Engineers on my teams to thrive independently.
- I have elevated/shifted my focus significantly because the team(s) I support have been uplifted and empowered to the point they can deliver their mission with me as a sounding board.

</details>

## 🧭 Culture and Leadership

- I get things right a lot of the time.

> - I create an environment where others feel safe to take risks and make mistakes, by modeling vulnerability, thinking in the open, okay with being wrong sometimes, and accepting corrections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- I create an environment where others feel safe to take risks and make mistakes, by modeling vulnerability, thinking in the open, being wrong sometimes, and accepting corrections.
```

- I generate energy in the teams I work with, motivating them to achieve great outcomes.
- I facilitate effective and timely decision making, especially when the decision affects multiple teams.
- I build solutions that improve the productivity and/or quality of work of many people/teams.
- I recognise patterns of organisational dysfunction, by observing data points, amplifying these signals, and advocating effectively for improvement.

> - I am a net-positive advisor or contributor to the leadership teams in my group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- I am an advisor or contributor to the leadership teams in my group.
```

Stating "net positive" here feels like it doesn't need to be said.

<details>
<summary>Examples</summary>

- I drove an entire multiteam program from inception through to shipping code, without regular oversight.
- I collaborated with other senior leaders to ensure I was aware of all major initiatives at Octopus and could account for them in my own initiatives.
- The teams I work with are consistently winning. They chose ambitious targets, managed scope and expectations effectively, and delivered customer value frequently with customer adoption trends going in the right direction.
- I identified a problem that was timely, important, and impactful, and worked closely with product, engineering, and executive stakeholders to articulate and refine a solution and delivery plan.
- I identified a significant problem that was increasing cognitive load for engineers resulting in multiple defects, then created a lasting best-fit solution that aligned with our strategy and solved the problem.
- I identified a pattern of organisational dysfunction that was causing poor outcomes, shared my observations with my leadership team, and escalated the signal effectively, resulting in the dysfunction being corrected and collectively getting better outcomes.

> - I regularly shared timely information in the right forums, like Slack and R&D Weekly, to amplify the work being done by my team(s), detect misalignment or surprises, and build confidence in our collective delivery plans.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- I regularly shared timely information in the right forums, like Slack and R&D Weekly, to amplify the work being done by my team(s), to detect misalignment or surprises, and to build confidence in our collective delivery plans.
```
